README.md, before:

Doctrine in Laminas API Tools
==============================

[![Build Status](https://github.com/laminas-api-tools/api-tools-doctrine/actions/workflows/continuous-integration.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/laminas-api-tools/api-tools-doctrine/actions/workflows/continuous-integration.yml)
[![Total Downloads](https://poser.pugx.org/laminas-api-tools/api-tools-doctrine/downloads)](https://packagist.org/packages/laminas-api-tools/api-tools-doctrine)

This module provides the classes for integrating Doctrine with Laminas API Tools.

Installation
------------

Installation of this module uses composer. For composer documentation, please refer to
[getcomposer.org](http://getcomposer.org/).

```console
$ composer require laminas-api-tools/api-tools-doctrine
```

This library provides two modules. The first, `Laminas\ApiTools\Doctrine\Server` provides
the classes to serve data created by the second, `Laminas\ApiTools\Doctrine\Admin`.
The *Admin* module is used to create api-tools resources and the Server serves those
created resources. Generally you would include *Admin* in your `config/development.config.php`
and *Server* in your `config/application.config.php`.

`Laminas\ApiTools\Doctrine\Server` has a dependency with `Phpro\DoctrineHydrationModule` to handle
entity hydration. See [documentation and instructions](https://github.com/phpro/zf-doctrine-hydration-module)
on how to set up this module.

> ### laminas-component-installer
>
> If you use [laminas-component-installer](https://github.com/laminas/laminas-component-installer),
> that plugin will install api-tools-doctrine, and all modules it depends on, as a
> module in your application configuration for you.

For Apache installations it is recommended the
[AllowEncodedSlashes-directive is set to On](http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/mod/core.html#allowencodedslashes)
so the configuration can be read.

API Resources
-------------

**NOTE!** This section was/is intended for the authors of
[api-tools-admin-ui](https://github.com/laminas-api-tools/api-tools-admin-ui).
While it is possible to use these instructions to manually create Laminas API Tools Doctrine resources
it is strongly recommended to use the UI.


`/api-tools/api/doctrine[/:object_manager_alias]/metadata[/:name]`

This will return metadata for the named entity which is a member of the
named object manager. Querying without a name will return all metadata
for the object manager.


`/api-tools/api/module[/:name]/doctrine[/:controller_service_name]`

This is a Doctrine resource route _like_ Laminas API Tools Rest `/api-tools/api/module[/:name]/rest[/:controller_service_name]`
To create a resource do not include `[/:controller_service_name]`

POST Parameters
```json
{
    "objectManager": "doctrine.entitymanager.orm_default",
    "serviceName": "Artist",
    "entityClass": "Db\\Entity\\Artist",
    "routeIdentifierName": "artist_id",
    "entityIdentifierName": "id",
    "routeMatch": "/api/artist",
    "pageSizeParam": "limit", // optional, default null
    "hydratorName": "DbApi\\V1\\Rest\\Artist\\ArtistHydrator", // optional, default generated
    "hydrateByValue": true // optional, default true
}
```

Hydrating Entities by Value or Reference
----------------------------------------

By default the admin tool hydrates entities by reference by setting
`$config['doctrine-hydrator']['hydrator_class']['by_value']` to `false`.


Custom Events
=============

It is possible to hook in on specific doctrine events of the type `DoctrineResourceEvent`.
This way, it is possible to alter the doctrine entities or collections before or after a specific action is performed.

Supported events:
```
EVENT_FETCH_PRE = 'fetch.pre';
EVENT_FETCH_POST = 'fetch.post';
EVENT_FETCH_ALL_PRE = 'fetch-all.pre';
EVENT_FETCH_ALL_POST = 'fetch-all.post';
EVENT_CREATE_PRE = 'create.pre';
EVENT_CREATE_POST = 'create.post';
EVENT_UPDATE_PRE = 'update.pre';
EVENT_UPDATE_POST = 'update.post';
EVENT_PATCH_PRE = 'patch.pre';
EVENT_PATCH_POST = 'patch.post';
EVENT_PATCH_LIST_PRE = 'patch-all.pre';
EVENT_PATCH_LIST_POST = 'patch-all.post';
EVENT_DELETE_PRE = 'delete.pre';
EVENT_DELETE_POST = 'delete.post';
EVENT_DELETE_LIST_PRE = 'delete-list.pre';
EVENT_DELETE_LIST_POST = 'delete-list.post';
```

Attach to events through the *Shared Event Manager*:

```php
use Laminas\ApiTools\Doctrine\Server\Event\DoctrineResourceEvent;

$sharedEvents = $this->getApplication()->getEventManager()->getSharedManager();

$sharedEvents->attach(
    'Laminas\ApiTools\Doctrine\DoctrineResource',
    DoctrineResourceEvent::EVENT_CREATE_PRE,
    function(DoctrineResourceEvent $e) {
        $e->stopPropagation();
        return new ApiProblem(400, 'Stop API Creation');
    }
);
```

It is also possible to add custom event listeners to the configuration of a single doctrine-connected resource:
```php
'api-tools' => [
    'doctrine-connected' => [
        'Api\\V1\\Rest\\User\\UserResource' => [
            // ...
            'listeners' => [
                'key.of.aggregate.listener.in.service_manager',
            ],
        ],
    ],
],
```

Querying Single Entities
========================

Multi-keyed entities
--------------------

You may delimit multi keys through the route parameter. The default
delimiter is a period `.` (e.g. `1.2.3`). You may change the delimiter by
setting the `DoctrineResource::setMultiKeyDelimiter($value)`.


Complex queries through route parameters
----------------------------------------

**NO LONGER SUPPORTED.** As of version 2.0.4 this functionality has been removed from
this module. The intended use of this module is a 1:1 mapping of entities to resources
and using subroutes is not in the spirit of this intention. It is STRONGLY recommended
you use [laminas-api-tools/api-tools-doctrine-querybuilder](https://github.com/laminas-api-tools/api-tools-doctrine-querybuilder)
for complex query-ability.



Query Providers
===============

Query Providers are available for all find operations. The find query provider is used
to fetch an entity before it is acted upon for all *DoctrineResource* methods except create.

A query provider returns a *QueryBuilder* object. By using a custom query provider you may
inject conditions specific to the resource or user without modifying the resource.
For instance, you may add a `$queryBuilder->andWhere('user = ' . $event->getIdentity());`
in your query provider before returning the *QueryBuilder* created therein. Other uses
include soft deletes so the end user can only see the active records.

A custom plugin manager is available to register your own query providers. This can be done
through this configuration:

```php
'api-tools-doctrine-query-provider' => [
    'aliases' => [
        'entity_name_fetch_all' => \Application\Query\Provider\EntityName\FetchAll::class,
    ],
    'factories' => [
        \Application\Query\Provider\EntityName\FetchAll::class => \Laminas\ServiceManager\Factory\InvokableFactory::class,
    ],
],
```

When the query provider is registered attach it to the doctrine-connected resource configuration.
The default query provider is used if no specific query provider is set. You may set query
providers for these keys:

* default
* fetch
* fetch_all
* update
* patch
* delete

```php
'api-tools' => [
    'doctrine-connected' => [
        'Api\\V1\\Rest\\....' => [
            'query_providers' => [
                'default' => 'default_orm',
                'fetch_all' => 'entity_name_fetch_all',
                // or fetch, update, patch, delete
            ],
        ],
    ],
],
```

Query Create Filters
==============

In order to filter or change data sent to a create statement before it is used to hydrate
the entity you may use a query create filter. Create filters are very similar to
*Query Providers* in their implementation.

Create filters take the data as a parameter and return the data, modified or filtered.

A custom plugin manager is available to register your own create filters. This can be
done through following configuration:

```php
'api-tools-doctrine-query-create-filter' => [
    'aliases' => [
        'entity_name' => \Application\Query\CreateFilter\EntityName::class,
    ],
    'factories' => [
        \Application\Query\CreateFilter\EntityName::class => \Laminas\ServiceManager\Factory\InvokableFactory::class,
    ],
],
```

Register your Query Create Filter as:
```php
'api-tools' => [
    'doctrine-connected' => [
        'Api\\V1\\Rest\\....' => [
            'query_create_filter' => 'entity_name',
            ...
        ],
    ],
],
```

Using Entity Factories
======================
By default, Doctrine entities are instantiated by FQCN without arguments. If you need anything different than that,
for example if your entities require arguments in their constructors, you may specify the name of a 
`Doctrine\Instantiator\InstantiatorInterface` factory registered in the Service Manager in order to delegate 
instantiation to that service. Currently this can only be done by directly editing the config for your resources as 
follows:

```php
'api-tools' => [
    'doctrine-connected' => [
        'Api\\V1\\Rest\\...Resource' => [
            'entity_factory' => 'key_in_service_manager',
            ...
        ],
    ],
],
```

Commit message:

Message against the war, in Russian and English
🇷🇺 Русским гражданам

Мы, участники Laminas, родились и живем в разных странах. У многих из нас есть друзья, родственники и коллеги как в России, так и в Украине. Некоторые из нас родились в России. Некоторые из нас живут в России. У некоторых бабушки и дедушки сражались с фашистами во Второй мировой войне. Здесь никто не поддерживает фашизм.

У одного из нас есть украинская родственница, которая спаслась из дома вместе с сыном. Поезд задержался из-за бомбежки на дороге впереди. У нас есть друзья, которые прячутся в бомбоубежищах. Мы с тревогой ждем весточки от них после воздушных налетов, которые беспорядочно наносят удары и попадают по больницам, школам, детским садам и домам. Мы не берем это из каких-либо СМИ. Мы наблюдаем это напрямую.

Вы доверяете нам достаточно, чтоб использовать наши программы, и мы просим вас довериться нам вновь. Мы нуждаемся в помощи. Выходите и протестуйте против этой бесполезной войны. Остановите кровопролитие. Скажите "Нет войне!"

🇺🇸 To Citizens of Russia

We at Laminas come from all over the world. Many of us have friends, family and colleagues in both Russia and Ukraine. Some of us were born in Russia. Some of us currently live in Russia. Some have grandparents who fought Nazis in World War II. Nobody here supports fascism.

One team member has a Ukrainian relative who fled her home with her son. The train was delayed due to bombing on the road ahead. We have friends who are hiding in bomb shelters. We anxiously follow up on them after the air raids, which indiscriminately fire at hospitals, schools, kindergartens and houses. Were not taking this from any media. These are our actual experiences.

You trust us enough to use our software. We ask that you trust us to say the truth on this. We need your help. Go out and protest this unnecessary war. Stop the bloodshed. Say "stop the war!"

Signed-off-by: Michał Bundyra <contact@webimpress.com>

README.md, after:

Doctrine in Laminas API Tools
==============================

[![Build Status](https://github.com/laminas-api-tools/api-tools-doctrine/actions/workflows/continuous-integration.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/laminas-api-tools/api-tools-doctrine/actions/workflows/continuous-integration.yml)
[![Total Downloads](https://poser.pugx.org/laminas-api-tools/api-tools-doctrine/downloads)](https://packagist.org/packages/laminas-api-tools/api-tools-doctrine)

> ## 🇷🇺 Русским гражданам
>
> Мы, участники Laminas, родились и живем в разных странах. У многих из нас есть друзья, родственники и коллеги как в России, так и в Украине. Некоторые из нас родились в России. Некоторые из нас живут в России. У некоторых бабушки и дедушки сражались с фашистами во Второй мировой войне. Здесь никто не поддерживает фашизм.
>
> У одного из нас есть украинская родственница, которая спаслась из дома вместе с сыном. Поезд задержался из-за бомбежки на дороге впереди. У нас есть друзья, которые прячутся в бомбоубежищах. Мы с тревогой ждем весточки от них после воздушных налетов, которые беспорядочно наносят удары и попадают по больницам, школам, детским садам и домам. Мы не берем это из каких-либо СМИ. Мы наблюдаем это напрямую.
>
> Вы доверяете нам достаточно, чтоб использовать наши программы, и мы просим вас довериться нам вновь. Мы нуждаемся в помощи. Выходите и протестуйте против этой бесполезной войны. Остановите кровопролитие. Скажите "Нет войне!"
>
> ## 🇺🇸 To Citizens of Russia
>
> We at Laminas come from all over the world. Many of us have friends, family and colleagues in both Russia and Ukraine. Some of us were born in Russia. Some of us currently live in Russia. Some have grandparents who fought Nazis in World War II. Nobody here supports fascism.
>
> One team member has a Ukrainian relative who fled her home with her son. The train was delayed due to bombing on the road ahead. We have friends who are hiding in bomb shelters. We anxiously follow up on them after the air raids, which indiscriminately fire at hospitals, schools, kindergartens and houses. We're not taking this from any media. These are our actual experiences.
>
> You trust us enough to use our software. We ask that you trust us to say the truth on this. We need your help. Go out and protest this unnecessary war. Stop the bloodshed. Say "stop the war!"

This module provides the classes for integrating Doctrine with Laminas API Tools.

Installation
------------

Installation of this module uses composer. For composer documentation, please refer to
[getcomposer.org](http://getcomposer.org/).

```console
$ composer require laminas-api-tools/api-tools-doctrine
```

This library provides two modules. The first, `Laminas\ApiTools\Doctrine\Server` provides
the classes to serve data created by the second, `Laminas\ApiTools\Doctrine\Admin`.
The *Admin* module is used to create api-tools resources and the Server serves those
created resources. Generally you would include *Admin* in your `config/development.config.php`
and *Server* in your `config/application.config.php`.

`Laminas\ApiTools\Doctrine\Server` has a dependency with `Phpro\DoctrineHydrationModule` to handle
entity hydration. See [documentation and instructions](https://github.com/phpro/zf-doctrine-hydration-module)
on how to set up this module.

> ### laminas-component-installer
>
> If you use [laminas-component-installer](https://github.com/laminas/laminas-component-installer),
> that plugin will install api-tools-doctrine, and all modules it depends on, as a
> module in your application configuration for you.

For Apache installations it is recommended the
[AllowEncodedSlashes-directive is set to On](http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/mod/core.html#allowencodedslashes)
so the configuration can be read.

API Resources
-------------

**NOTE!** This section was/is intended for the authors of
[api-tools-admin-ui](https://github.com/laminas-api-tools/api-tools-admin-ui).
While it is possible to use these instructions to manually create Laminas API Tools Doctrine resources
it is strongly recommended to use the UI.


`/api-tools/api/doctrine[/:object_manager_alias]/metadata[/:name]`

This will return metadata for the named entity which is a member of the
named object manager. Querying without a name will return all metadata
for the object manager.


`/api-tools/api/module[/:name]/doctrine[/:controller_service_name]`

This is a Doctrine resource route _like_ Laminas API Tools Rest `/api-tools/api/module[/:name]/rest[/:controller_service_name]`
To create a resource do not include `[/:controller_service_name]`

POST Parameters
```json
{
    "objectManager": "doctrine.entitymanager.orm_default",
    "serviceName": "Artist",
    "entityClass": "Db\\Entity\\Artist",
    "routeIdentifierName": "artist_id",
    "entityIdentifierName": "id",
    "routeMatch": "/api/artist",
    "pageSizeParam": "limit", // optional, default null
    "hydratorName": "DbApi\\V1\\Rest\\Artist\\ArtistHydrator", // optional, default generated
    "hydrateByValue": true // optional, default true
}
```

Hydrating Entities by Value or Reference
----------------------------------------

By default the admin tool hydrates entities by reference by setting
`$config['doctrine-hydrator']['hydrator_class']['by_value']` to `false`.


Custom Events
=============

It is possible to hook in on specific doctrine events of the type `DoctrineResourceEvent`.
This way, it is possible to alter the doctrine entities or collections before or after a specific action is performed.

Supported events:
```
EVENT_FETCH_PRE = 'fetch.pre';
EVENT_FETCH_POST = 'fetch.post';
EVENT_FETCH_ALL_PRE = 'fetch-all.pre';
EVENT_FETCH_ALL_POST = 'fetch-all.post';
EVENT_CREATE_PRE = 'create.pre';
EVENT_CREATE_POST = 'create.post';
EVENT_UPDATE_PRE = 'update.pre';
EVENT_UPDATE_POST = 'update.post';
EVENT_PATCH_PRE = 'patch.pre';
EVENT_PATCH_POST = 'patch.post';
EVENT_PATCH_LIST_PRE = 'patch-all.pre';
EVENT_PATCH_LIST_POST = 'patch-all.post';
EVENT_DELETE_PRE = 'delete.pre';
EVENT_DELETE_POST = 'delete.post';
EVENT_DELETE_LIST_PRE = 'delete-list.pre';
EVENT_DELETE_LIST_POST = 'delete-list.post';
```

Attach to events through the *Shared Event Manager*:

```php
use Laminas\ApiTools\Doctrine\Server\Event\DoctrineResourceEvent;

$sharedEvents = $this->getApplication()->getEventManager()->getSharedManager();

$sharedEvents->attach(
    'Laminas\ApiTools\Doctrine\DoctrineResource',
    DoctrineResourceEvent::EVENT_CREATE_PRE,
    function(DoctrineResourceEvent $e) {
        $e->stopPropagation();
        return new ApiProblem(400, 'Stop API Creation');
    }
);
```

It is also possible to add custom event listeners to the configuration of a single doctrine-connected resource:
```php
'api-tools' => [
    'doctrine-connected' => [
        'Api\\V1\\Rest\\User\\UserResource' => [
            // ...
            'listeners' => [
                'key.of.aggregate.listener.in.service_manager',
            ],
        ],
    ],
],
```

Querying Single Entities
========================

Multi-keyed entities
--------------------

You may delimit multi keys through the route parameter. The default
delimiter is a period `.` (e.g. `1.2.3`). You may change the delimiter by
setting the `DoctrineResource::setMultiKeyDelimiter($value)`.


Complex queries through route parameters
----------------------------------------

**NO LONGER SUPPORTED.** As of version 2.0.4 this functionality has been removed from
this module. The intended use of this module is a 1:1 mapping of entities to resources
and using subroutes is not in the spirit of this intention. It is STRONGLY recommended
you use [laminas-api-tools/api-tools-doctrine-querybuilder](https://github.com/laminas-api-tools/api-tools-doctrine-querybuilder)
for complex query-ability.



Query Providers
===============

Query Providers are available for all find operations. The find query provider is used
to fetch an entity before it is acted upon for all *DoctrineResource* methods except create.

A query provider returns a *QueryBuilder* object. By using a custom query provider you may
inject conditions specific to the resource or user without modifying the resource.
For instance, you may add a `$queryBuilder->andWhere('user = ' . $event->getIdentity());`
in your query provider before returning the *QueryBuilder* created therein. Other uses
include soft deletes so the end user can only see the active records.

A custom plugin manager is available to register your own query providers. This can be done
through this configuration:

```php
'api-tools-doctrine-query-provider' => [
    'aliases' => [
        'entity_name_fetch_all' => \Application\Query\Provider\EntityName\FetchAll::class,
    ],
    'factories' => [
        \Application\Query\Provider\EntityName\FetchAll::class => \Laminas\ServiceManager\Factory\InvokableFactory::class,
    ],
],
```

When the query provider is registered attach it to the doctrine-connected resource configuration.
The default query provider is used if no specific query provider is set. You may set query
providers for these keys:

* default
* fetch
* fetch_all
* update
* patch
* delete

```php
'api-tools' => [
    'doctrine-connected' => [
        'Api\\V1\\Rest\\....' => [
            'query_providers' => [
                'default' => 'default_orm',
                'fetch_all' => 'entity_name_fetch_all',
                // or fetch, update, patch, delete
            ],
        ],
    ],
],
```

Query Create Filters
==============

In order to filter or change data sent to a create statement before it is used to hydrate
the entity you may use a query create filter. Create filters are very similar to
*Query Providers* in their implementation.

Create filters take the data as a parameter and return the data, modified or filtered.

A custom plugin manager is available to register your own create filters. This can be
done through following configuration:

```php
'api-tools-doctrine-query-create-filter' => [
    'aliases' => [
        'entity_name' => \Application\Query\CreateFilter\EntityName::class,
    ],
    'factories' => [
        \Application\Query\CreateFilter\EntityName::class => \Laminas\ServiceManager\Factory\InvokableFactory::class,
    ],
],
```

Register your Query Create Filter as:
```php
'api-tools' => [
    'doctrine-connected' => [
        'Api\\V1\\Rest\\....' => [
            'query_create_filter' => 'entity_name',
            ...
        ],
    ],
],
```

Using Entity Factories
======================
By default, Doctrine entities are instantiated by FQCN without arguments. If you need anything different than that,
for example if your entities require arguments in their constructors, you may specify the name of a 
`Doctrine\Instantiator\InstantiatorInterface` factory registered in the Service Manager in order to delegate 
instantiation to that service. Currently this can only be done by directly editing the config for your resources as 
follows:

```php
'api-tools' => [
    'doctrine-connected' => [
        'Api\\V1\\Rest\\...Resource' => [
            'entity_factory' => 'key_in_service_manager',
            ...
        ],
    ],
],
```
